---
id: dol-odep
agency: "Department of Labor"
agency_abbrev: "DOL"
agency_logo: "DOL.png"
title: "Developing new policies and protocols to prevent unintentional AI bias in human resources processes"
summary: "Working with Department of Labor's Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) policymakers and private sector technologists, including key AI developers, to develop new policies and protocols to ensure that human resources processes and tools related to artificial intelligence and non-human interaction are not unintentionally biased against job seekers and employees with disabilities."
subtitle: "How can we help the Department of Labor adopt and implement technology policy and strategy?"
partner_description: "The Department of Labor's <a href=\"https://www.dol.gov/odep/\">Office of Disability Employment Policy</a> (ODEP) is the only non-regulatory federal agency that promotes policies and coordinates with employers and all levels of government to increase workplace success for people with disabilities. ODEP was authorized by Congress in the Department of Labor's FY 2001 appropriation. Recognizing the need for a national policy to ensure that people with disabilities are fully integrated into the 21st-century workforce, the Secretary of Labor delegated authority and assigned responsibility to the Assistant Secretary for Disability Employment Policy. ODEP is a sub-cabinet level policy agency in the Department of Labor."
project_link: https://www.dol.gov/odep/
status: "upcoming"
---
AI will increasingly shape human resource (HR)-related applications including: job hiring, recruitment, retention and career advancement. AI and machine learning are technological innovations that are often driven by the processing of large amounts of data from data sets (Big Data) to yield insights into intricate patterns for people, places and things. These activities can result in potential, if unintentional, bias toward certain groups of people, including people with disabilities. If not adequately addressed in the design process, these unintentional biases could harm employment and advancement opportunities of both job applicants and current employees who have disabilities. Additionally, the technologies behind AI systems must be made accessible so that employees with disabilities can benefit from the insights they divulge. If accessibility and bias control are not built-in from the outset, a positive development for most becomes a negative development for others.

Over the last seven years, ODEP has funded the Partnership on Employment and Accessible Technology (PEAT). PEAT’s work has focused on developing policies, effective practices, communications, technical assistance, and network-building in the area of accessible workplace technologies. These efforts have helped employers, employees, technology companies, advocacy organizations, and users with disabilities capitalize on the benefits of these emerging technologies.

ODEP proposes that the PIF, working in collaboration with: ODEP policy staff, the PEAT contractors, and our federal partners, lead these critical engagement efforts, using his or her content expertise to determine where intervention would be most appropriate and productive. In addition to serving as a ‘technology translator’ between the policy and technology communities, the PIF would help ODEP and its partners at the state level draft AI-related technology policy and outreach strategies that can be widely adopted. The PIF will be supported by ODEP’s Employment Support Policy Team and by PEAT staff and will engage with ODEP senior staff on all technology-related issues.
